---
layout: post
title: Your second brain - org-roam
date: 2021-03-28
summary: My experience using org-roam
categories: common
---

I think majority of people who extensively use note taking in their daily life and use notes to organize their lifes have heard about zettelkasten technique. The last couple of years it became very popular. I started diving into it on the new year's of eve (2020-2021), it can be verified by my tweet:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">new year&#39;s eve. it&#39;s time to dive into zettelkasten and org-roam</p>&mdash; Ayrat (@ayrat_badykov) <a href="https://twitter.com/ayrat_badykov/status/1344666526411067392?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">December 31, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

So I've been using it for three months so far. In this post I'll describe my experience and my routines around it. But before that let my quickly describe what zettelkasten is and why some people call it their second brain.

###  Zettelkasten

Zettelkasten (German: "slip box") is a note taking and knowledge management technique invented in the 15th Century. But it got relatively famous because of german sociologist  Niklas Luhmann (1927-1998) who used it extensively when writing more than 70 books and nearly 400 scholarly articles throughout his career. And Luhmann insisted that he was so productive because of Zettelkasten.

Zettelkasten has two basic ideas:
1. Each note should contain a single idea, a peice of information
2. Notes are organized in a hierachical manner, i.e. notes reference each other

Usages:
- writing books
- doing research
- knowledge management


Before computers came to our life, people who used Zettelkasten where doing everything with peices of paper. But fortunately for us, we have some tools:

tools:
- org-roam
- notion
-


confluence, notion



* Plan
- Introduction (new year tweet, other org mode posts)
- Zettelkasten (zettelkasten, org-mode)
- Org-roam
